hope you enjoyed the episode brought to
you by our sponsor thrive get 50 off
your at-home gut health test when you go
to
trythrive.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
[Music]
ben greenfield welcome to the show well
thank you tom welcome back i should say
it's good to have you back yeah
so i i don't even remember am i am i a
two-peat or a three-piece i actually
don't know the answer to that question i
feel like three i feel like this is my
third time i think so then you had to up
and move and and uh we're in an all new
location however for the audience it's
going to look exactly the same because
we moved this out nobody needs to know
except i just stuck my foot in my mouth
and gave the big reveal now that's kind
of the same
same spot that is all right but one
thing that i heard in a podcast from you
recently that i thought was really
intriguing is you said every day i'm
trying to be less of a boy and more of a
man i say then by that you did you did
say that wow
um
well
trying to remember what podcast i said
that in or what the context was it was
like what are you it was something about
your future like what are you trying to
do with your life i mean it was like a
real kind of legacy yeah that that's
interesting um
you know because there is a certain
element of
childhood wonder and childhood curiosity
and even this idea that the things that
made you weird when you were a kid are
often the type of things that serve you
as an adult because
your unique characteristics if you're
really working
as a self-actualized person meaning that
you have a distinct purpose in life and
often that distinct purpose in life is
something that feeds on the unique skill
set that you were born with
then you're gonna you're gonna retain
some element of your childhood or in my
case some element of my boyhood
right so for me i loved to read a lot
and i loved to write and put thoughts to
paper i loved the outdoors and kind of
like this idea of physical culture but a
curiosity about physical culture like
why does the body do this why do my legs
burn when i go up this hill but they
don't burn when i go down the hill you
know why
you know do i do i
you know feel better when i'm playing
tennis after i've had macaroni and
cheese versus after i've had nothing at
all you know and
so this curiosity about the human body
and brain a love for reading and a love
for writing and also i would say a love
for teaching are things that really make
me happy now in my current job right
versus you know some things that i've
had to study that didn't come as easily
to me when i was a boy but that i still
do as a part of my job now yet derive
less happiness from like math or science
or the nitty gritty details versus the
big visionary picture
so
you you do have to as you age set aside
some things from childhood i mean you
know there there are there are silly
aspects of childhood you know everything
from from
in patients to um to
you know arguing with others to you know
defiance of authority you know and all
sorts of little things that pop up as
you're growing up but yet i think that
you need to strike a balance between
forsaking the things from childhood that
no longer serve you while at the same
time staying really hyper connected to
the things that you're you're naturally
good at how do people that's interesting
so i bristle bristles the wrong word it
draws my attention every time you come
back to this idea of naturally good at
do you think that that's something that
really matters right the whole carol
dweck fixed mindset type of yeah and i
won't even drag you into that water i
just
i am my
the central one of the central questions
of my life has been how much does it
matter that you started out with a
natural inclination to something and got
a disproportionate return on your time
investment and how much of it matters
just like this this is my goal and i
need to do the things that move me
towards my goal
and i am hyper aware that there are some
things for me like we were talking
before we started rolling um when you
are given an iq test one of the things
they show you is a flat piece of paper
in two dimensions obviously because it's
just a test
and they draw lines on and they say fold
this piece of paper if you were to fold
this piece of paper what would the shape
look like and they want to see what your
spatial relations are like can you
mentally manipulate an object in your
mind which i cannot do right so like
crumple up the paper throw in the waste
basket there i made a basketball i
remember the first time i looked at that
i was like wait you're telling me that
people can actually do that like they
can actually imagine what something
looks like just in their head right and
uh shout out to charlie lee and then
i'll finish the thought here
i remember i was fascinated cause i
really wish i could draw i've always
been blown away by that and i had a
friend that could draw charlie lee and
he would draw all the time and i was
like how do you draw it like in the you
know the weird positions where i
wouldn't have known to say the camera
has moved but that's the idea right low
angle high angle from the back whatever
and he was like oh just imagine what it
looks like and then turn it in your head
and i remember thinking what like how
the hell do you turn in your head so
anyway i'm not good at that at all right
so i wouldn't pursue like when i think
about learning to draw
i could get better there's no question
but there seems to be like a real part
of
the the sort of skill set allocation of
my mind that just
was given to other areas and not to that
so i wouldn't try to lean into something
where that was going to be really
important for me
but i also don't only focus on
my natural gifts they're just other
things that have been important to me
enough that i'm like this is going to be
worth putting the energy even though i
might get a 0.7 return on my invested
time where somebody else gets a 3x right
right and so let's let's take someone
who is skilled at art at pattern
recognition at folding little papers etc
and you're both tasks with learning that
process of seeing what the pattern is
that you're supposed to make or
anticipating what the pattern would be
when you're folding over the paper based
on the lines that are marked upon it
if someone is naturally good at that
activity like we're also talking about
this before we're recording
both your wife and my wife we we tend to
um or or they tend to see in more
patterns
and they also would be like
like my wife for example is dyslexic she
sees
words as shapes and had a very difficult
time reading growing up and also writing
because you know
rather than learning phonetically she
actually has to see every single thing
as an image and as a shape which you
would imagine would kind of slow down
the the learning process via reading
pretty dramatically
however she is amazing at art and
pattern recognition and imagery and
visualization and that's a skill that
she naturally has probably because her
brain is working in a different way and
and recognizing those patterns
differently rather than learning
phonetically
if you were to sit her and i down and
give her that task that you described
she would learn it more quickly than me
it would come more naturally to her
however i could still learn it right and
and i could still practice it and i
could still become proficient at it i
totally sucked at math and science in
high school i hated it it wasn't
relevant to me um i wasn't interested in
it it didn't really seem to come
naturally to me versus like reading and
write i could i could
churn out an essay in no time flat you
know sitting in front of a blank page
and you know
the same essay that would have left
other students you know crying or
scratching their heads or you know
drumming their fingers are completely
frustrated
and so yeah i i think that the
acknowledgement that you are naturally
good at certain things is
it's actually really important
as a way of determining the things that
you might be called to as your natural
unique skill set that's going to serve
others best can you define called two
yes i i will momentarily um and
that that doesn't mean that you can't
learn
other things it just means
that if you have identified that you're
naturally good at
certain skills
then i think that weaving those into
your career will leave you
feeling a little bit more
i guess in the zone or self-actualized
or even just more
productive and impactful with what it is
that you're doing
or what it is that you've been called to
do when i say what it is that you've
been called to do what i mean by that is
everybody was born with a with a unique
skill set and and a purpose based on
that skill set that i would say would be
a calling right like
basically um you know in my case you
know reading writing teaching love for
the the human body and brain and
physical culture i've woven all those
together into you know writing cookbooks
and studying the human body and teaching
others via via podcast or books or
blogging or what have you
and i feel like time goes by really fast
when i'm doing that i feel like i'm in
the zone when i'm doing that i'm happy
at the end of the day when i'm doing all
that and i feel as though i am
i am heeding that call that i was born
with
myself my wife and
my my twin boys who are 13 now
every night we we meditate we also
meditate in the morning
our our morning meditation is all based
around what it is we're grateful for and
who it is who we want to pray for or
help or serve or send positive emotions
to that day who it is we really want to
be there for that day but in the evening
we engage in self-examination and
purpose self-examination being playing
your entire day like a movie in your
mind watching yourself in the third
person like a character in the movie and
identifying
what did i do good
what could i have done better and where
was i most connected to my life's
purpose where did i feel most
purpose-filled
and it's a really interesting exercise
because the way that i explain it to my
sons is watch yourself
watch that character in the movie and
ask yourself
when am i rooting for them when am i
fist pumping for them when are they
making the right decisions
and
and when do i really feel like they're
the hero
of that movie that movie of the day and
that is the type of practice that you
use to answer that question
what have i done good this day right and
then also where are you not reading for
that character where are you grimacing
and thinking i think i don't that's the
wrong decision dude don't don't go that
way or you wasted a lot of time there or
you failed at that yeah you learned from
it but you failed at that and so that's
an important lesson
and that serves as the fuel to answer
the question what could i have done
better on this day and then the final
question
which may seem at first like it's kind
of like that what did i do good today
question but it's a little bit different
it's where was i most purpose-filled
like where did i really feel as though i
was living out my life's purpose and
typically that question
is answered by watching that that
character who's who's in the movie in
your mind
and identifying the place during the day
where they just like they were fully
present had a smile on their face time
was going by quickly they were doing
what they were naturally good at uh and
and and
in in a very purpose-filled environment
that
is i think really really important when
it when it comes to
identifying those things that you are
naturally good at or called to or that
are purpose-filled for you
i think that there if there's something
that you learn that maybe
didn't come naturally to you or that
maybe you struggle a little bit more to
wrap your head around i i don't think
that
that necessarily means that those
activities can't be fulfilling or can't
be a part of your purpose statement or
what you might write down if you are
identifying what it is that was most
purpose
driven at the end of the day
but
i mean for me personally like it's
pretty rare that i'll write down
something in that purpose statement that
isn't weaving in something that i've
just been really really connected to
from youth that i think is a little bit
more almost like nature than nurture
it's really interesting the idea of
purpose do you think that purpose
changes over time for a given individual
or is it really it's so anchored to
something that you have a natural talent
for that it's going to be relatively
consistent
purpose
so so your purpose statement can change
over time i think the last time that i
was on your show i don't know if we
talked about purpose statements but my
purpose uh
was um to
live an adventurous joyful and
fulfilling life and inspire others in
doing so something along those lines
like every purpose statement should be
like a single succinct preferably
memorizable statement right um and i set
aside that purpose statement a year and
a half or two ago
when
i kind of was shifting out of like the
ben the global adventurer off doing
ironman triathlons and spartan races you
know beating up my body and inspiring
other people and you know not you know i
i love these guys but i was realizing
i'm not really like the
like the the david goggins anymore and
you know or the the you know the the the
dean carnazzis or the the 100 uh iron
man cowboy guy i forget his name but you
know basically this idea of going out
and crushing myself as a way to inspire
others and being the global adventurer
who beats up my body and you know comes
back to tell the tale you know the
warrior life
i didn't feel connected to that anymore
honestly i was a little bit like tired
and beat up and had been doing that for
20 years
but i i still loved to to read and to
write and to learn and to teach and to
to create and and to sing and to play
and do all these things that felt really
fulfilling to me and so my purpose
statement shifted and literally my
purpose statement became to read write
um sing and speak compete and create in
full presence and selfless love to the
glory of god right and so that that
became my purpose statement and yeah it
might shift in in
you know five years ten years whatever
yet i've found that every purpose
statement i've created has in some way
woven in something that i did really
enjoy to do when i was a kid or
something that woven certain elements of
my personality or my
my natural skill set
that
you know puts a smile on my face and
keeps me in the zone so yeah the purpose
statement can change but i think that
the core activities or skills that
you're weaving into the purpose
statement are probably going to stay
somewhat consistent through life
do you think that's because we're
getting some sort of feedback loop from
the what i'll call disproportionate
returns like when i put time and energy
into this thing like it it comes more
easily to me than it might to other
people and that feels good the sort of
effortlessness maybe it's getting into
flow right um or is it something else
i i think that um
that that idea that something comes easy
definitely
gives you insight as to
what is really going to fuel your
purpose
if there's something that comes easy to
you
that you recognize doesn't come easy to
everybody right like in my case writing
like i said you can put me in front of a
blank page and not only will i fill that
page but time will go by very quickly
while i'm doing it like like you know
i'll write for 20 minutes and or and and
i'll write for
hours and feel like it's been you know
15 20 minutes or whatever like i can
write and write and write it's almost
like you gotta pull me away from writing
and it it doesn't feel very effortful
there's some effort put into it but it
just comes easy to me it flows and you
put my wife in front of a blank page and
she'll just be like crying after 10 15
minutes because she just doesn't know
what to do flip that scenario put me in
front of an art canvas with a paintbrush
and yeah i might make something but it's
not going to be anywhere near the
masterpiece that she'll create
and so i think that there is something
to this idea of what comes easy to you
what is effortless to you to a certain
extent and what puts you in the flow
as being something that gives you a
great big fat clue about your purpose
statement
that being said
i think that that doesn't mean that when
you're self-actualized and living out
your life's purpose statement that all
of work is play that that you never feel
as though you kind of have nose to the
grindstone and and you're you know
you're sweating a little bit and and
it's hard work and you're tired at the
end of the day
but for me it's a different tired at the
end of the day when it's tired at the
end of the day with the smile on my face
because i know i've been super connected
to my life's purpose all day versus
tired at the end of the day because i've
been
grinding against something that i'm not
really naturally that great at right
it's interesting so so much of what
you're saying resonates with me i think
it's really powerful for people to have
the self-awareness of what they're good
at what comes easily what brings them
joy and maybe the barometer of did you
love it when you're a kid is a good way
to find those things
but my life has been um it's
because
every life is an n of one
experimentation and hopefully we all
sort of look at everybody's input and
i'm certainly not trying to reject
anybody's notions i'm trying to figure
out what they can offer me so here is
because i think what you're saying
probably feels more intuitive to people
i think more people gravitate towards
that which is
partly why i've explored the other edge
and then my life has just been a
reflection of it so i when i graduated i
from the time i was 12 i knew i wanted
to be a filmmaker that was all i wanted
to do
and went to film school
totally a joyful experience
but at the end of it i realized i didn't
have any talent
and that was devastating and i'll define
talent so i with all of my focus energy
and the assistance of an entire
university arguably at that time the
greatest film school on planet earth i
was not able to turn out a good film
and that was
that was devastating in ways that i
can't explain
and
the only way that i could begin to claw
my way out of a downward spiral i don't
think i was ever truly depressed but i
used to come home and just lay on the
floor to give you an idea of like this
was a very dark period for me
and i would just lay there like
i knew what i wanted i know what my
dream is and i have absolutely no idea
how to get it and it really felt like
the universe had said well you suck at
this thing and therefore you're just
never gonna make it and that that was
you know this is all what late 90s early
2000s so there's no internet there's no
like easy access to people that can give
you sort of these nuggets of wisdom
that'll help you out so i'm laying there
like okay what the hell am i gonna do
and i wish i could remember what what
gave me the insight to learn about the
brain but i thought all right i'm gonna
start researching the brain
and i came across brain plasticity which
was extraordinarily debated in the late
90s early 2000s like is it real like can
you really change as you get older
and
because it was debated i made a decision
to
even if i was wrong i was going to act
as if brain plasticity were real and
that i could learn anything and that
meant that i could get good at
filmmaking even if i wasn't currently
good at filmmaking
and then that when i went and um
tried to get into that still couldn't
break in even though i believe that i
could get better over time at this point
um led me to business
and in business i really had no
instincts
and i remember i was talking to gary vee
and he was trying to like trap me by
saying no no you really were cause this
whole thing is it's what you're born
with and he was like no see you really
were a good entrepreneur you just never
been in the environment that brought
that out before and
i was so bad at business in the
beginning that
the only contribution i could make to a
conference call was to say goodbye and i
remember i would get excited i could
tell the call was wrapping up and i'm
finally going to get to say a word on
here right and that's where i started
and it
trying to learn business plunged me into
anxiety because i was constantly in over
my head i did not get disproportionate
returns it was a brutal slog but
now on the other side of learning that
thing
it i'm obsessed like i now for me i
realize this is all a game of solving
puzzles once you understand the physics
of the situation you can think from
first principles and anybody i don't
care what your natural inclinations are
you can learn to think from first
principles
once you're at the layer of first
principles now you can build up in any
industry
yeah i think one of the keys there too
is relevance meaning when i was hating
math and science in high school a big
part of that is that it wasn't relevant
to me i didn't see a lot of the
crossover of of calculus or of of you
know
um
you know trigonometry and and sine and
cosign and you know all these variables
to real life and when i got to college i
remember my first year i had a fantastic
math instructor and you know i i was
home schooled k through 12 and so
my math curriculum in high school
for a couple of years was under tutelage
via an instructor oh my gosh his name
was chris and i hated we had to drive
the half hour from lewiston idaho up to
moscow idaho to go to chris's to learn
math i would get in trouble because i
didn't care about math i didn't do the
homework and it was super annoying
because because nina who was another you
know homeschooled classmate of mine
would drive up with me and she was just
like straight a's just crushed it and
you know and it came easy to her and
flowed whereas like not only did it not
come easy to me but i didn't freaking
care like i just didn't see the
relevance at all like where's the
crossover to this and you know into
whatever
tennis and and making food and um and
and and art and writing and creativity
and all the stuff that i really did love
first math instructor in college
he started to talk about math from a
banking and investing and an interest
and compounding interest and wealth
standpoint well for me
you know i've i've always kind of been
into making money you know like i used
to
actually be really surprised after
halloween i would take all my candy i
would hide it under my bed until the
summer came around and then i would take
all the candy out lay it all out put
price tags on it and sell it to all the
neighborhood kids
you know i i started investing when i
was 13. you know i
i loved in and part of it you know maybe
and i've identified this in myself a
slight spirit of scarcity versus a
spirit of abundance meaning i just you
know i think i kind of like to hoard
wealth when i was a kid and and
now i've kind of i've kind of directed
that energy or that interest and wealth
a little bit more towards a spirit of
abundance and sharing and blessing
others and giving and charity however
that math instructor
teaching math
through the lens of wealth generation
totally transformed my interest in math
made it super relevant for me and i
remember when
nina who was in that class homeschool
with me went to the same same college at
least for the first year took the same
math class together when she showed me
her test score like a semester in and i
showed her my test score and my test
score beat her test score and i got
straight a's in math and science all the
way through college once science became
relevant to me because science was
relevant to the body the brain to
biochemistry to microbiology to all
these things i was learning about the
human body because i want to be a doctor
and math became relevant because i could
apply it to chemistry or i could apply
it to wealth preservation or making
money all of a sudden i actually did
become quite good at those things that i
don't think i was i was that naturally
good at but but the relevance was a key
and so i i think that's part of it too
is you must understand the importance
and the relevance and you know with my
own sons who we homeschool you know
slash unschool for me a big big part of
it is how can i make this book this
lesson this this language learning
excursion whatever it is relevant to
them now they are boys and i and i know
we've come a long way since your initial
question
but i think that that part of that
question that you asked about me wanting
to set aside things from from boyhood
was driven in part by my sons
because i have identified the distinct
lack of a ceremonial recognized rite of
passage
from
boyhood into manhood i think that as a
result of that we have many
irresponsible
men
walking around who are still
although they have men's bodies and they
look grown up are stuck in boyhood stuck
with what we might call peter pan
syndrome right
still questioning
am i a man am i ready to provide do i
need to go out and prove myself in some
way and and
you know
for me personally that was just like
doing 20 years of iron man triathlon and
spartan races and bodybuilding and
trying to look like you know the uh you
know like like a real true hardcore man
because nobody ever told me
when i was a teenager like you're a man
now you're ready yo stamp of approval
you're ready to provide you're
responsible you can survive and
you know this is somewhat controversial
but
women arguably actually do have a time
of their life that they go through when
they are undeniably becoming a woman
right the onset of menses when they have
their first period when when they go
through that physical
change that's that's very very
distinctly a sign that they are becoming
a woman and many will say that that
another kind of formative part of that
for a woman is when she's given birth
for the first time right that'll get
your attention um now
yeah i think so i think my my mom told
me once ben this would be like peeing
out a watermelon and and that that made
sense to me when i was a boy okay mom
peed out a watermelon that must that
must have hurt um with with my sons i
wanted to break that cycle of
the green-filled men never knowing when
they become men and kind of just trying
to prove it along the way
the reason i think that's so important
is because when we look at the epidemic
of say like you know fatherlessness in
america i think a big part of that is
driven by
boys
living in men's bodies who don't have a
great deal of responsibility who feel
like it's it's okay because you know i'm
peter pan i'm a young boy i don't need
to provide i don't need to protect i
don't need to take responsibility for my
decisions therefore i can
you know basically knock up this lady
walk away leave her with the baby and
you know go off and find my next new
adventure because
i'm a boy i play for a living like that
that's what i do
when you reverse that and you weave into
the upbringing of our males this idea
that has been
really a part of many many cultures for
a long period of time we see it more
often now in in more you know indigenous
cultures tribes you know hunter-gatherer
you know um tribes you know to a certain
extent you could say that the uh you
know like like in in in jewish culture
you know maybe a bar mitzvah is a little
bit like this
um but ultimately in most western
cultural contexts we don't have this
idea that there's something hard a
so-called rite of passage that a young
man or even arguably a boy goes through
that
recognizes their transition into either
adolescence or their transition into
adulthood i did not want my sons to go
20 years of either doing some kind of
hardcore masochistic sport to prove to
the world that they were a man or worse
yet making other decisions that they
regret later on in life because they
were still living like a boy so both of
them you know and this is fresh on my
mind what is it right now it's uh uh
august right and so back in march they
both went through their rite of passage
into adolescence however 13 years old
okay right so their rite of passage into
adolescence involved uh them going off
into the wilderness for five days they
had a backpack and a little blanket and
a knife now this was facilitated by an
organization in idaho that specializes
in in fostering boys rite of passage
into adolescence and adolescence right
of passage into adulthood and so they'll
do something like this twice they'll do
this again when they're 14 or 15 years
old at an even deeper harder more
intense level but this last one that
they did was the rite of passage into
adolescence so there are survival
instructors there traditionally and i
learned this as i was studying rights of
passage the rite of passage is not
overseen by the father right it's
overseen by an uncle or another member
of the tribe or to make sure some type
of leadership or help them
i don't know if that's part of it i
suspect that the bigger part of it is
in a way it's a little bit of a cutting
of the cord right and so if you're
dependent upon a parent an immediate
parent while going through rite of
passage i think it doesn't create as as
independent a scenario as if it were
fostered by someone else
so
in this case they've trained with an
organization called twin eagles
wilderness school
since they were six years old they've
been visiting that school for summer
camps for wilderness survival knowing
this is building up to this right no not
not knowing that they didn't know about
their rite of passage it's actually a
cool story i'll i'll tell you more
momentarily but it wasn't really
revealed to them what they were doing
until literally a couple months before
when they got their packing list and a
letter that offered them the opportunity
to do this and also gave them the choice
of whether to accept or to turn down
their invitation to what would you have
done if they turned it down
well the letters came in the mail and
it was really really nice the way they
did this because they're like old
parchment paper it's kind of burnt
around the edges and has a real kind of
rustic feel to it and they both i
remember they're sitting on the front
portion of the sunshine and they both
open these letters and it just basically
spelled out this idea that that you know
coming in march
there is uh there there is basically a
challenge that you're going to be given
that will be a part a key
integral part of your transition into
becoming a man
and you know you'll need to bring a
backpack a wool blanket a knife you'll
have uh these you know these calls and
these trainings that you go through with
some of the instructors prior to showing
up out here in the middle of nowhere
north idaho and all you need to do is
basically you know
call this i i forget if that one was
call a number or write an email to
actually be accepted into the program
and they both said yes and and they both
had been training with that organization
again since they were six they know fire
making and shelter building but really
the fire making shelter building
wilderness survival like yes those are
core skills that you want to have but
really the key part of the rite of
passage is being alone
facing your fears finding yourself in a
space where you must dissolve your your
ego and and understand that there are
forces of nature that are more powerful
than you and that
you you you really
um
you're
you have to set aside a lot of
pride and and a lot of egotistical
mentality to be able to just go off and
be on your own and be with yourself in
that in that set and setting
so
they accepted it they went off they they
did the whole rite of passage uh in
march and there were about eight other
young men who were there at the special
place we dropped them off which is
called medicine circle my last memory
was you know when when they came in we
dropped them off the instructors met
with us parents for about an hour an
hour and a half and and just basically
felt out our emotions what we were
feeling saying goodbye to our sons
knowing that when we saw our sons again
it was going to be different because you
know for example we don't call them boys
at home anymore we call them young men
they're given more responsibilities
they're given more chores they're
considered to or
um
expected to be more contributory members
to the household in terms of the level
of the chores that they do and
um the the responsibilities that they're
given at the house and
so
my memory though was
these instructors came up you know our
sons are facing us they step across this
this cedar bow into
the medicine circle they face us they
get blindfolds on and
you know my sons told me the next five
hours all they were doing was following
a drum through the wilderness
blindfolded having no clue where they
were going and the next five days were
everything from you know native american
style sweat lodges to sleeping on your
own out in the wilderness to you know
surviving to meeting with these
instructors and having having circles
where you talk a lot about you know
about what it means to to provide what
it means to transition from boyhood into
manhood
and um it was super special when we
finally went back to pick them up after
not hearing from them for five days
because they're out in the middle of
nowhere there's no cell phone or
connections or anything out there
and there was a final ceremonial fire
gathering where you know all eight boys
stood before us their parents and
they all gave a speech about who they
were
when they came in and who they were now
what their shadow self was that they had
set aside
and who it was that there was their true
self that had emerged so that was the
rite of passage into adolescence and
when i get home from this trip in l.a
they have their gathering feast which
means that they have a whole bunch of
friends and family members over they
prepare a meal there's a celebration
they give gifts
and
that's really a key is you don't just go
out and like let's say your son is going
to go to a rite of passage so that
they're able to better set aside those
things from boyhood it's not just go out
and do hard right like it's an
actual
ceremonial recognition afterwards and
leading up to the experience that says
yeah this is a hard thing but this isn't
just for you know for shits and giggles
right this is
for you to show that you're seriously
and responsibly taking yet another step
towards manhood and this is for us your
parents to show that we are we're
releasing some of our
you know our our desire to just
basically you know care for you and
recognizing that you're now better able
to care for yourself
so
you know in a sense i think we've come a
little ways in response to your first
question but
that's that's what i really mean when i
say transitioning from being a boy into
being a man not leaving aside those
things that we've been talking about the
things you were good at when you were a
kid but embracing responsibility and and
going through some type of
recognition some type of rite of passage
that shows that you're ready for that
did you and your wife react differently
to
them being
taken out and going through this
so
i don't think my wife really
realized the
um
almost like the the seriousness and
importance of the entire thing because
she'd seen me and my sons river and
taran going off to wilderness survival
camps and going off and doing spartan
races and triathlons together like we've
just kind of always done
those type of hard things together but i
think what she didn't realize was how
ceremonial this was and
how important it was that we recognize
that they really are truly going through
a formative part of their lives and
after those five days that we weren't
going to be treating them the same way
and that they were going to be different
people and that was in that it was
really important that they understand
you know in terms of the way that we
speak to them the way we address them as
young men not boys that that was going
to be an important part of the
greenfield house afterwards and i think
when she saw those blindfolds go on
and
and you know these big like kind of
tough-looking instructors you know to
you know take our sons off and she's not
going to talk to him for five days and
you know you and and that's when she
started we were walking down the long
path back to our truck you know through
through the area outside of north idaho
in medicine circle there where we left
them and she starts crying and i think
that was when
the
kind of like the importance and
seriousness and epicness of this
experience began to to strike her
whereas because i you know for example
when we have like family vacations i'm
always the planner and and you know i'm
planning out the the flights and the
hotels and the restaurants and the
excursions the experiences and
everything so i had been a bigger part
of working with the instructors to make
sure that all the ducks were lined up in
a row for this rite of passage where she
was just kind of like okay you know boys
are gonna go off and do something hard
so for her i think it just hit her all
at once like a ton of bricks you know oh
my sons are becoming men
and um for me it was more of a
culmination of all the things that i've
done with them leading up to this point
and then trusting for them to go off and
do this on their own now
so yeah it was it was a little bit
different for her um and i think for for
mothers in general
you know they they like for at least
i've witnessed this in my own life they
like for their sons to be comfortable
and cared for and you know not hurting
and not alone and not scared and so i
think it was hard for her knowing that
you know little taran was huddled up in
a debris shelter somewhere you know in
the dark with bears around all by
himself you know with a wool blanket and
a knife and just figuring out how to
survive for himself
um perhaps i'm a little bit more
calloused or jaded or whatever but i
just i thought it was cool that my sons
were getting a chance to to really face
their fears and become men
let's talk about thrive did you guys
know that your gut is related to so many
potential health issues trouble focusing
bloating constipation maintaining a
healthy weight and skin blemishes like
acne and eczema
our gut communicates with our brain
through nerves and hormones and when gut
health is poor it can directly
contribute to these types of health
concerns my wife lisa has struggled
profoundly with gut problems so i know
exactly how troublesome this can be
unfortunately lisa is not alone in this
battle one in five americans are
struggling with gut health issues
thankfully we can fix a lot of these
issues with a better diet and the right
probiotics and thrive makes this process
really simple by offering an at-home gut
health test so you can know the state of
your gut health and what problems it may
be causing
thrive will then use your results to
develop custom probiotics to help treat
these problems these aren't the one size
fits all probiotics you will find at
your local grocery store these are
personalized to you based on the results
of the test thrive is easy convenient
and accessible thrive sends the test
straight to your door and based on your
thrive test results they will customize
a diet and probiotic suggestions just
for you when you subscribe to thrive's
program you can also save ten percent on
all probiotics and other products they
provide you can get fifty percent off
your at-home gut health test when you go
to try thrive dot com slash impact
theory that's tri-thrive.com
impact theory and thrive is spelled
t-h-r-y-v-e
go there right now for fifty percent off
your at-home gut health test again
that's try thrive dot com forward slash
impact theory all right guys take care
be legendary
my gut instinct is that it has nothing
to do with you being callous though you
may be
uh
in most of these rituals when you really
look into the more traditional cultures
it's there's a an almost ceremonial
removing of the child from the care of
the women like that's part of it like
you're with the women they come and get
you they remove you and then they take
you out to do whatever this hard thing
is
and that is very very fascinating and
look i don't know nearly enough about
this stuff but when i say that it
captures my imagination that would be a
true understatement
i read the book long walk to freedom
nelson mandela long time listeners the
show will probably be tired if you're
not gonna be confused the long walk by
stephen king which is definitely not to
be confused
it's kind of a relevant book
yeah
and in the book he he legitimately went
through um his tribe's um coming-of-age
ritual and i found it utterly
fascinating and i don't claim to
understand it and i need to research it
more but here are the parts that i
remember and if anybody i'm watching
this knows better facts drop them in the
comments but
um they would strip these boys naked i
think they were 14. they sit them down
on the ground spread eagle in front of
the whole tribe and then
an elder or um the
tribe leader i don't remember who it is
comes up with a really sharp
rock they grab your foreskin
and they just cut that off and when
they do it you're supposed to scream
this warrior prayer
and uh then they cover you in clay
like head to toe and then that night a
woman comes and like slowly removes it
all
and i just thought whoa like there's
something there there's some like
communication almost like a rebirth from
the class yeah like oh it's and
it's just so interesting to have the
chills that they
there's something about the you know the
breakdown in their society of the roles
of male and female and that it's the
woman that ultimately comes and like
washes you in sort of
you know either the moment of rebirth or
the sort of putting back together i
don't know i just found it absolutely
fascinating yeah i think there's there's
some savagery
that has been a part of many cultures
rights of passage
that i don't think is necessary and that
you know i know
that especially a lot a lot of insights
well
primarily in in more of an ancient
context i would say there are
there are you know aspects of modern
psychology that we have
we're now well aware of related to
post-traumatic stress disorder and
traumatic events that dictate that
if
a rite of passage is just a terribly
torturous event i think that that has
potential to wire the cells up into
sympathetic nervous system mode like
that constant fight and flight super
wired up type of approach that could
leave someone you know scarred for life
to a certain extent um either
physically or psychologically or both
like you know i i like to read my son's
wild west stories and there was one wild
west story reading about a
native american tribe
that you know a little bit similar to
the story that that you've just told
would
take the young men and pierce their skin
with hooks and hang them from the inside
of the of like a big lodge
and then they would attach chains to
those hooks and hang buffalo skulls from
those chains so they were like pulling
the skin away and then the elders would
twirl these hanging suns you know with
poles you know around and around so the
buffalo skulls are weighing them down
and pulling at their skin
and eventually like the skin basically
just like tears and they fall to the
ground and they have to like run through
the village dragging the buffalo skulls
through the village until all the
buffalo skulls have come off and torn
away from the skin and any that do not
tear away they send them off into the
field
and they just have to basically drag the
skulls around the field until they all
just like fall off and the wounds are
festering the flesh is rotting and then
when they come back if they really want
to take things to the next level as if
that weren't enough they had chopped off
like the pinky or the index finger to to
prove that they were they were an actual
warrior well you put somebody through
all that and i i guarantee that
especially in a modern day context um
you're gonna have you know some
some possible post-traumatic stress
disorder from something like that
uh contextualize that or or compare that
to like the woman who got in trouble in
new york city a few years ago
uh for leaving her son
about 20 miles from home
uh in a subway station after he had you
know grown up traveling on the subway
and knowing where their home was and
knowing new york city i think he was
like 12 or 13 like not super young he
may have been younger but either way she
left him there as a sort of rite of
passage and his role was to get home
right to figure out how to buy a subway
ticket and take the right line and and
walk from station to station and
eventually wind up at the front door
which he did but word got out about this
and she got in a lot of trouble for you
know how how dare you allow your son to
navigate through the state what if he
was kidnapped you know what if something
horrific happened what if what if he got
lost never made it home you know
whatever
but i actually think that you know
that's the type of modern day rite of
passage especially for more of an urban
setting that i'm not necessarily against
you know i i think that when you get to
the point where there's physical damage
and potential for death you know
in in a very profound way and and you
know something different than just like
finding your way home on the subway
station i think that there are many
examples of rites of passage that
we could come up with that still
recognize that oh you're a man now or oh
you're responsible now or oh you're an
adolescent now that don't involve just
like
pain and torture and some of the things
that we've seen in
in some cultures
but yeah i mean i think there has to be
some level of discomfort
i mean you know
like i'm like i said you know i think
that a big part of for example me going
off and doing spartan races and obstacle
course races getting barbed wire wounds
and traveling around the world doing all
these iron man events and everything
yeah it was great for learning about
fitness it was great for you know
inspiring people to fitness it was great
for practicing what i preach and for
learning how to be a better coach
because i was coaching people doing
these events but yeah a big part of it
was hey am i man now yo i just did the
harder iron man am i a man now like how
do i feel now do i feel like i've proven
myself now and never did i really reach
the stage where i felt as though i'd
really proven
much at all you know for for me it's
just been a gradual realization
that you know that i am a man that i can
set aside the things from boyhood that
i'm a father that i'm a husband that i
have a greater sense of responsibility
but man it would have been super nice
for me to have been
given that recognition
when do you think that's it it just
needs to be formal that somebody cause
part of all this to me is like one you
have to define what a man is which you
rattled off a few things earlier that i
assume was your definition of what a man
is but so knowing what the target is so
knowing whether or not you hit it and
then putting you through something where
it's like okay you're now like this is
the official line right right it's like
i could have taken my sons out to do
whatever like what
san francisco and att park right and
technically you know if
we had had like six months of training
leading up and chat's at the dinner
table about yo guys when we do this when
we finally cross the finish line they're
in the park like that's going to be our
our official like coming of age ceremony
into adolescence and this this is a big
deal and we're going to prepare for this
and we're going to have a special like
feast or dinner or fire circle when we
get home from having done this there's
no reason you couldn't take you know a
fabricated event like that and turn it
into a rite of passage in the same way
that there are organizations like that
twin eagle school i was talking about
that's you know really you know
fabricating what could also be just like
five days of wilderness survival
learning but instead turning that into a
ceremonial rite of passage right so i
think that the ceremony and the
recognition is a big part of it and
what's interesting actually is you see a
lot of these cultures will
weave in and this is kind of related to
like the ideas
that um that jamie wheel talks about the
author of the book recapture the rapture
or um
what what's the book that he and stephen
kotler wrote stealing fire stealing fire
this idea of um hedonic calendaring
and the the strategic use of certain
plant medicines at certain formative
times of one's life i was actually i was
interviewing jamie and i think it was he
and i that were talking about this like
you know rite of passage into adulthood
is accompanied by some type of ego
dissolving plant medicine ceremony maybe
the first you know week or the first
month that you're a newlywed and married
to your wife you're doing some type of
plant medicine or mdma-esque type of
protocol where you're facing each other
you know in bed and going through like
that that full coming together as part
of a plant medicine ceremony or perhaps
when you
turn 30 or turn 40 or turn 50 or like
formative birthdays things like that and
you also see some of that woven into
some of these cultures like the use of
some type of plant medicine experience
because if you think about it a big big
part of that is
dissolving the ego and and learning
about yourself in that state will you
define dissolving the ego basically
it would be
um is it dissolving thinking that i'm
cool no it's so there was this lady and
she just wrote a book i was reading
um i was actually reading the book
summary of this book but i now want to
read the book she apparently like
via what i think was a stroke completely
lost the use of the left hemisphere of
her brain and wound up writing a book
about left right brain hemispheric
activity and how it felt to be just in
the right brain
and it was as though she she lost
a lot of the the logical
rational
um thoughts that tend to just be
fluttering through our minds all day and
we're just like floating in this space
where she was completely open to
new ideas to
who she actually was versus what the
world expected her to be
to um
[Music]
to to just this this idea of going from
just pure survival and logic and
rational thinking to more
love and openness and creativity and a
lot of those things that that you would
experience if you were to shift someone
more into like right brain versus left
brained activity for myself when i've
done you know plant medicine
um in plant medicine in more of like a
like a macro dosing type of context like
a journey type of context
what i find is that i'm more open to new
ideas i'm less critical on myself i
i think more freely and more these just
be clear these are all the traits of
someone whose ego has dissolved yeah
yeah it when i'm in that state where the
ego isn't taking over with all these
logical rational do do do thoughts but
it's almost like you transition to a
state of being
and it's almost like a carefree state of
being where all you're doing is just
basically being overwhelmed with
thoughts of creativity or loving others
or
setting aside fears or setting aside
personal self-judgments on yourself that
might have come from from an ego driven
state
and
the best way i can describe it is you
feel
more connected to
your true self
and and just you know less questions
less you know being who i who who the
world expects me to be versus who i
truly am
and so yeah it's kind of difficult to
succinctly describe but it's almost as
though you just set aside all the
self-criticism and others criticism and
logical thought and rational thought and
left brain thought and instead just you
know float away into almost more like a
peaceful open blissful state
it's interesting i've heard people say
dissolve the ego a bazillion times and
every time i hear that i think it's
people
thinking about the sense of i
me what i want that well yeah like this
lady forgot her name like she just
didn't know her name which was really
interesting you know and
you know just identifying
i guess one way i could describe it is
you know identifying yourself as a
self-dependent self-sufficient loner who
can survive on your own versus realizing
that we're all part of an interconnected
human race that's that's super duper
dependent on on love
and and caring for others and being
connected with others and and it's just
you know there's another book
called transcend the new science of
self-actualization by scott kaufman
and that book goes into this idea that
to be fully self-actualized isn't
necessarily to be
you know independent or self-sufficient
but to realize not only
that
whatever
purpose it is that you're living out
should be lived out in the spirit of
loving others
but also in the spirit that you're
dependent on others and that their
purpose and their skill set is something
that's blessing you and basically this
idea
the ego seems to be
um
somewhat tied to
like selfishness loneliness
self-sufficiency etc because you're in
charge is something that seems to
dissolve away when you're in that state
it's very interesting so i heard you say
that there was a moment i think it was
with plant medicine but don't hold into
that where you had a moment where you
realized i didn't need to be the hero
what did you mean by that
that was an essay that i wrote
about the hero's journey
i was
uh
i was illustrating the hero's journey
through the life of jesus christ right
this idea of
living the ordinary life which in his
case would have been as a deity in
heaven completely comfortable taken care
of you know sitting with god
and then
being presented with this threshold to
cross you know go down to earth become a
dirty human get born in a diaper and
poop your pants and get scarred and go
through teenager hood and all the
brokenness that it means to be a human
being after being a deity and you know
meet mentors and allies and and
eventually
you know have you have have a a battle
and return with the elixir of you know
salvation for all of humankind
and you know take that that long road
back you know similar to bilbo traveling
back to the shire and the hobbit and
and eventually come back and then ascend
into heaven and
how we look at this through the eyes of
the hero's journey
and
related to that
you know it actually was part of a
plant medicine ceremony where i realized
that
i'm pretty hard on myself or had been
pretty hard on myself up until that
point in terms of trying to be
the person who is going to like
save humankind who is going to
you know
really
um
not only like be the ultimate go-to
source of knowledge for people fixing
their bodies or their brains but be
very similar to the way that i was
brought up like ben you're the white
knight ben you're the hero ben you're
special then you're perfect ben you know
you you can do it all like that was that
was really the type of
of talk that my parents gave to me and
it almost really like
despite that being really good for
your confidence also gave me a lot of
kind of like egotistical arrogance that
i could i could do everything
and also a bit of
um
control and micromanaging that seem to
go along with that like you know i'm the
hero i'm gonna control every scenario
i'm gonna save everyone you know my job
is the most important
and one thing that happened as a part of
that that particular ceremony which was
like 28 hours long
was
there was this little part of my brain
and this is really hard to describe it's
kind of funny because when you're
describing
experiences like this where you're
journeying in a completely different
state sometimes people who have been in
that state get what you're saying but
people who haven't you know it's it's
it's really interesting
um to to try and voice and detail what
it is that i experienced but basically
it was as though
over and over and over again there was
like this little
like uh clock maker inside my head
trying to uh or i guess maybe
a better would be locksmith inside my
head trying to open this little safe at
the back of my brain where all those
control tendencies and arrogant
tendencies and egotistical tendencies
resided
and
and i kept being resistant to that over
and over and over and over again and
that was always followed up with like
this image of me like putting on armor
and holding a sword and going off to
battle and preparing yet again to go and
and
fight the world to you know to to
conquer the dragon and to be the be the
white knight in shining armor that you
know that that you know saves the world
and i remember like
it must have been eight nine ten times i
kept going back to that place and the
music would crescendo and i'll be
putting on and then what would happen is
i would just go into this dark place and
it was just like
fire and hell and skulls and you know
all the atrocities that have ever been
done to humankind and you know the
holocaust world war ii and you know
piles of bones
and i was there fighting like fighting
against the fire and fighting as dragons
and demons you know all these these
crazy spirits and i was defeated every
time i'd like wind up bloodied and
broken and curled up in a fetal position
you know bleeding and crying these are
all during this this is psychedelic
trips yeah yeah exactly and then like
the final
time that that music crescendo and i was
getting ready to go to battle
i i basically thought you know what i am
i'm not
going
to go to battle like this burden is not
mine to go and save all humankind from
all their sin and suffering and to be
the white knight riding in on a horse
and and
uh
that like the the the thought that came
to my mind was somebody's already done
this somebody has already you know died
on a cross taking on all that sin and
shame and suffering and i don't need to
go off and do all that battling myself
and be crucified myself all i need to do
is just basically
tell people about the free gift of
salvation that's already been offered to
them and it was like right then i felt
like 20 pounds lighter i
i woke up with a smile on my face felt
amazing and it was as though right then
i just started to come out of the hole
whatever it was like 27 28 hour
trip
and i emerged from that
just feeling as though a giant load had
been lifted off my back that i didn't
have to prove anything to the world that
all i needed to do was love other people
and share the hope that is within me and
not have to worry about being perfect or
controlling every scenario or you know
being arrogant or not accepting other
people
and you know it was a really really
interesting experience
but ultimately
you know i think the biggest thing that
came out of it for me
was
love others
more than yourself
be there for others build others up and
don't try to don't try to fix people
as much as just
try to love people
wow that idea of
how important love is to us as a species
it's interesting you and i
i think use very different language for
this kind of thing
um
but i definitely get where you're coming
from but when i think about us as a
species and how we need love and like
but need love as in a child a
um an infant will
fail to thrive as they call it if it
isn't touched loved cuddled
um and it's i think it was um
oh god i forget who said this to me on
the podcast amazing woman
um
and i will remember soon enough but she
said tom we have a nature that requires
nurture i think it was lisa feldman
barrett that said that to me
and i remember that just hit me like a
ton of bricks like we the way that we as
a species have evolved like there is
this need for
um
something back but it it yeah it's so
real and so tangible in terms of like
you want skin to skin contact and um you
know the the actual act of loving and
paying attention to the child shapes its
brain and if it doesn't get that then
the brain doesn't develop right i mean
it's crazy to think it is and what
what's crazy and super relevant to where
we're at right now
uh in in terms of
social distancing
remote work and
a definitely greater degree of digital
interaction
we do thrive on that
deeply connected humor in human
interactivity to the extent to where
we have for example touch receptors
called pacinian corpuscles and these
things actually respond hormonally in
terms of a dopamine release and a
serotonin release and a feel-good
neurochemical response to actual touch
right and that that can't be replicated
via a virtual hug or via an emoticon
we have oxytocin
you know the trusting loving hormone
that's released during breastfeeding and
after an orgasm and even when we shake
someone's hand or we hug them
that results in in again not only an
anti-inflammatory response but this
feel-good neurochemical release that
seems to be hard-wired into all of us we
have a response to human pheromones
that dictate that we can actually read
you know for example a woman can can
read
something as as
as
as intricate as the as the immune system
compatibility of a potential mate with
her
based on those pheromones that are
released by a man that would dictate
whether or not the child that they have
would have a greater amount of um
of of immune system strength
based on those two people having some
amount of immune system
um differences right like the more alike
the two immune systems are
the less robust the immune system of the
offspring might be you talk about that
study where they gave the women the
shots that have been slept in they said
hey just smell it and rank them in order
that or the fact that women will choose
a different mate if they're on a birth
control pill versus not and then
possibly even regret that later on like
it's really crazy so we have pacinian
corpuscles and we have oxytocin and we
have these neurochemical responses and
we have pheromones and
we we now know that there's an
electromagnetic signal that's emanated
by the heart that that goes out like
about 15 feet and the brain creates a
similar electromagnetic signal that
is something that that we haven't even
begun to tap into when it comes to
science of human interaction the
potential for things like telepathy and
remote viewing and you know like annie
jacobson has this book called paranormal
like it's an even how the military has
been trying to study like how do these
signals interact and what are these
mysteries of the human body when we're
in proximity with one another or
creating electromagnetic energy that
others can perceive
so you take all of that
and you ask like
why like like why from it from an
ancestral or or what some might call an
evolutionary standpoint would we have
all these triggers built into us that
respond to the presence of and the touch
of other human beings and the the
electrical presence of other human
beings
well
it's survival
right if you
were isolated or banished from your
village or from your tribe
thousands and thousands of years ago it
would have meant sure death being left
out in the elements right in that
sympathetic nervous system response that
occurs as a reaction to social isolation
uh which is a little bit different than
loneliness because you you know
loneliness is simply a perception it's
it's a it's a perception that whatever
you perceive to be the amount of human
interaction that you should be getting
is not at the same level as whatever
level of human interaction that you are
experiencing right so
um we we can be lonely and surrounded by
5000 friends on facebook or even at a
cocktail party and be lonely but this
idea that we have woven into our
physiology
this
sympathetic nervous system fight and
flight stressed out high heart rate high
blood pressure high inflammation poor
sleep response to not being able to
physically interact with other humans is
built in because
there was a time when we would die if
left out in the cold and left out in the
elements and banished from our village
and so
now when we're in that same scenario and
we see this growing epidemic of
loneliness and the host of chronic
diseases and depression and suicide that
seem to be springing from that even in
in a digital era where we're
hyper-connected we have to ask ourselves
like can we replace these these
physical meaningful interactions that
have so many things going on that i
don't think we've even begun to dig into
the science of can we replace those with
with digital you know zeros and ones and
pixels and and
i think that there's something to be
said for
the blessing of for example during what
could have been a horrific economic
crisis you know during covet it being a
lot less due to the ability to be able
to remote work and have zoom parties and
you know and see your friends on
facebook or whatever it could have been
a lot worse don't get me wrong
but
we have to acknowledge that physical
interaction and touch and eyesight and
you and i being 15 feet from each other
versus me on skype up in washington
state and you down here it's
way different and we we cannot
we cannot deceive ourselves into
thinking that that can be replaced with
digital interaction
yeah going through covet has been
because i
like isolation now take this all in
context of i'm married and my marriage
is my greatest joy and so all of what
i'm about to say i'm saying within the
context of being in a loving marriage
and without that i i do wonder what it
would really look like but in the
context of being married i like to be
alone i like to have my space so when
covid kicked off if i'm honest
thankfully you know none of my employees
except one got kovid
no one that i know died thank god and
obviously my heart bleeds for anybody
that did it's absolutely horrible um but
it ended up being the business did
better through kovid than it did before
and so it's like this ended up being
this really sort of amazing
reset i told my employees i would never
let them work from home
and now of course i'm like well yeah
actually it works a lot better than i
thought i do have fears about i think a
mixed environment will probably be
difficult but we'll cross that bridge
but even i
now
at the you know point that we're sort of
18 months into this thing i'm like okay
like it's enough now i can feel there's
some part of me that hungers to get out
and even
even with my wife and obviously regular
contact from her i went to a
chiropractor it was the first time i'd
gone to see a doctor or chiropractor or
anything in 18 months
and um he just touched me to like you
know figure out like where it was
bothering me it was so
like it
mattered i'm not sure what other word he
is not like i was like oh my god that
feels so good but it was like whoa like
that got my full attention in the way
that a casual touch from a chiropractor
would not have i was like whoa it's this
sort of electric thing yeah then i was
like jesus not being touched by anybody
other than my wife for the last 18
months is actually mattered in some way
it's it's sacredness it's the sacredness
of human touch that can't be
replaced by a foam roller like i can
foam roll i can lacrosse ball i can use
a little you know massage percussion gun
till the cows come home and i feel
pretty good but there's nothing that
compares to the endorphin release and
the feeling of being cared for by
another human being when uh when a
massage therapist is is touching you
there are there are so many things that
we try to replace with self-sufficiency
or with the absence of human touch or
arguably even the absence of
nature that just sucks the sacredness
right out of those interactions another
example would be and you know
this might be relevant to you having
been involved with with quest nutrition
for example and understanding
macronutrients right and this whole idea
that certain macronutrient ratios have
different effects on the on the human
body
but when we look at nutrition you know
i'm not an if it fits your macros guy
i'm not an if it fits your macros guy or
what's it called ii fym because you know
you you can take something like uh let's
say you know an atkins diet type of
approach and yeah you can achieve a a
high protein you know moderate fat low
carb type of scenario
from you know kafo based meat that's
been abused and and you know chickens
that have lived in in tiny cages you
know standing in their own crap for you
know their entire life and you know cows
pumped up with hormones and fed grains
and unnatural animal products and
preservatives and you know hefty amounts
of sodium chloride you know all the
things that you get
in that perfect macronutrient ratio
where you're just taking into account
carbs and fats and proteins
and you could take that exact same
macronutrient ratio and get it from like
fresh tomatoes grown in the sunshine and
kale and a wonderful regeneratively
raised cow that was loved its entire
life and and fed amazing food and you
know and lived out in the sunshine again
feeding on fresh grass and when you look
at the bio photonic and even even the
spiritual energy that you get from
eating real whole food derived from
nature as close to nature as possible
there's a certain sacredness in that and
a certain
not just physical but also spiritual
energy derived from a meal like that
that you i just don't think you can
replicate if you completely
just go straight to carbs fats proteins
without you think there's something
extra cellular so like i've heard you
make reference to the fact that you
don't think the brain is necessarily the
seed of consciousness
so do you think that there's something
going on
with the actual meat so the cow lived a
great life or a terrible life but by the
time it ends up on my plate
is there something still residing
somewhere other than the cell that
carries with that yeah i think that
there are elements of energy that we're
now just beginning to tap into driven
a lot by the emergence of interest in
the mitochondria and the idea that for
example
photons of light can affect the activity
of the electron transport chain in the
mitochondria and accelerate the
formation of atp
meaning that people who are out in the
sunlight a lot or who are using that's
all cellular use red light are able to
create energy although those those
photons are a little less measurable
than say like you know glucose or even
oxygen
and then you get into
sound medicine take yet another step
towards invisibility where we know that
frequencies of sound and vibrations of
sound can have an impact on certain
organs and that certain musical
instruments that are tuned to different
hurts frequencies can either
elicit feelings of peace and love and
joy or feelings of anger and fear and
shame even though we can't necessarily
take those frequencies and put them into
a tube and then we get into quantum
physics right where
we know that humans seem to be able to
interact with each other over long
distances via something like photonic
energy and that's where we're getting
some of those things like remote viewing
or two people in two different countries
having the same dream and talking about
the next day and there's something going
on there that's very difficult to
measure and even when we do try to
measure it seems to change based on some
of those slit light experiments where
you know it's it it can be very very
tricky to to measure photons just
because the miracle of measuring them
seems to affect them pretty dramatically
and then we get to this idea that well
when i eat a cow grown on a
regeneratively you know over generally
run farm you know it was grass-fed grass
finished cared for wonderfully
and you know and sacrificed in a humane
manner compared to a cow that was abused
its whole life and and fed fake food and
you know and then electrocuted and and
you know brought over to my plate you
know um
there's some type of energy there
that i think we have yet to even be able
to measure in for example the realm of
nutrition science
but i i think that part of it really is
spiritual i think part of it really is
the fact that as creatures on this
planet we can't disconnect ourselves
from the life force of every other
creature on this planet and either the
positive
manifest as biology
oh well i mean
i think you know the answer to that
question
if
you've read a book or seen the work of
an author like bruce lipton who wrote
the biology of the belief or the book
the body keeps the score this idea that
emotions you know michael singer uh uh
you know the book surrender and and
you know th this whole idea
that
your emotions your thought patterns your
beliefs can all
drive your cells to be in either a
stressed out sympathetic nervous system
type of mode or a parasympathetic
nervous system type of mode and that
cells can become stuck based on our
subconscious patterns
spun in in that stressed out mode that
would then cause things like calcium
leakage into the cell a change in the
electrochemical balance across the cell
membrane a disruption in the ability to
be able to create atp a disruption in
overall physiology and actually if you
look at and i think there's something to
be said about this things like um you
know traditional chinese medicine
you see certain emotions actually
associated with certain disease
conditions right like like bitterness
and anger would be associated with
rotting of the bones or low bone density
or bone cancer right and
i don't know if there's ever been an
epidemiological study that has looked at
you know profile of mood states courts
and the amount of angerness and
bitterness in someone and things like
you know dexa bone scans and bone
density or you know or bone cancer or or
some type of malignancy in bony tissue
but
yeah the the link between emotions and
biology
is undeniable we are not
you know well the ancient gnostics would
have argued that we are all spirit and
all soul and that's all that matters and
that we can completely disentangle
ourselves from our physical bodies and
that that's not important well i don't
think that that's true and neither do i
believe that we can separate the
physical from the spiritual and say that
can you help me understand the
difference between the physical and the
spiritual
well i think that the physical would be
tangible
biological uh
cells in tissues and flesh and you know
and and
all of the molecules within our body
that are made up of all these different
atoms that we could eventually identify
on the periodic table of the elements i
think that the physical you know to a
certain extent is something that that is
measurable that is tangible that is
witnessable that is feelable whereas the
the spiritual is something
that in a sense requires a little bit
more faith to be able to
believe in that that isn't necessarily
visible or measurable and yet is yet or
it will never be i don't know if we're
ever going to open up a human body and
say oh hey look we found it here's the
soul right
i don't think it's measurable i i i do
it do i think that it is
something that we can experience or see
i think possibly i think that that some
people who have been in those type of
states we were talking about earlier
like an ego dissolved state
or you know during a plant medicine
ceremony or something like that
it seems as though you do to a certain
extent almost like cross a portal into
something like a spiritual world
um can i ask a really crazy question
that will help me understand what you
believe yes i don't expect anyone to
take this literally but
um
is the human body basically the nft that
points at the soul which is the actual
thing because if i know you believe that
the soul lives on beyond the body
so obviously they can't be one in the
same
but i'm just curious there is some
linkage right i mean you ultimately are
going through this life you're
experiencing something you're meant to
learn something i assume like there's
some reason from your perspective that
god has created humans
very knowingly put in this situation
um
what what is then that correlation
between the body like do you even worry
about
the trying to find some explanation of
how the two are tied or it's just like
look that's well beyond sort of what the
human mind at least at this phase is
going to understand it's really kind of
irrelevant like how do you approach that
yeah
so
i don't think the body is bad i don't
think it's a throwaway i is someone who
believes that god made human beings
i i don't think god would have made a
human
or a tomato or a tree or a thorn bush or
a lake or a shark or a black widow or a
platypus or anything like that
as some kind of a just like a throwaway
object
right i don't think that heaven
like because i believe that that we'll
live in heaven as part of of the
afterlife i don't think heaven is going
to be a bunch of us sitting as ethereal
spirits on a cloud with fluffy you know
wings playing a harp
right to me that sounds kind of boring
actually
um we have these amazing bodies and we
have wonderful taste receptors that can
taste a thousand different explosions of
flavor as we sit down to a meal
and we have you know tactile receptors
that can feel pleasure and can
orgasm and can release oxytocin when we
touch other people all those things that
we were just talking about and we have
the ability to be able to to jump in
cold water and feel that wonderful
sensation and to sweat and get the
endorphin released
after that
well some parts of the cold water can be
wonderful sometimes afterwards more so
um and and you know we have hair that we
can do in different ways and people have
different color eyes there's all these
elements of biology and physical
existence that are so magical and so
cool and so enjoyable that i don't think
that's all going to be like stripped out
from underneath us in the afterlife or
or when we die but at the same time we
have
we have spirits that are housed inside
these physical structures and you know
it's almost like this invisible flame
that seems to drive things like our our
character our personality our
our our values our you know how much
peace and joy and love we might have
versus how much anger or fear or shame
that we might have
the this idea that the the the physical
body
is just like a shell a throwaway shell
that houses the spirit is not something
that i agree with but i think that that
the two coexist and that the spirit's
almost like the driving force what what
we might call the the chi or the prana
or the life force that drives this this
human physical biological machine
and i believe like
in in terms of like you know heaven i
don't think it's going to be heaven
i think it's going to be heaven and
earth and it's all going to be just
perfect right like our bodies as we have
them now but working perfectly without
anger and sickness and disease and
and and
and all the things that kind of annoy us
now
i think that we'll retain our bodies do
you think that will change because those
are the things that are the test
like why so as you were describing okay
you've got the platypus the black widow
sharks and all that right and i
thought okay if i were going to so i i
don't believe in
god as
we see it represented in religions
um there's clearly something i don't
understand so i have no problem being
open-minded about that like i certainly
don't think i understand that's for
sure um but as i think about it i'm like
okay so
god is creating this equilibrium there's
some sort of balance and without the
shark or the black widow one thing just
goes too much and so you have this
all-powerful thing that understands this
notion of ecosystem okay i can get
behind that i see why some things have
to eat others and all that and cool
um but then when i think about what the
afterlife is going to be in that
scenario it's actually interesting to me
that you don't imagine it just being
ethereal because that actually sounds
quite boring
but then why would we have
like anger
and we were talking about this before we
started rolling there's a flip side to
everything right so by having sickle
cell anemia you don't shuttle the oxygen
as well but you also don't get malaria
so there's this trade-off that to me
feels like human emotion
human emotion has a thing there's a
reason for it and if you take away
emotion
like people that selectively have those
areas of their brain damaged they can't
even decide where they want to eat lunch
and you suddenly realize you can be
normal in every single way but if you
don't have an emotional response to
something you don't have a way to make
decisions so even emotion while it may
seem like the black widow of the human
experience or anger uh it has a role so
why do you imagine a world in which that
is stripped out i don't imagine a world
in which emotions are stripped out
i imagine a world in which the negative
harmful aspects of any emotion
are stripped out
what i mean by that is for example uh my
my son we were actually talking about
this earlier i don't remember if if you
were here we were talking about how each
week i give my sons a book to read and
they they write a little book report
about that book and it's a way of me
being able to take the host of books
that i read on a weekly basis and find
the ones that i think would be really
helpful for them even though i might not
have time to go through the whole book
with them i give it to them it's got all
my pages folded over and all the
highlights and all the underlines they
can read it through dad's eyes and see
some of the things i found important and
then they write a book report about that
book
and so every week they're learning how
to use their reading muscles and use
their writing muscles and and put their
thoughts to paper and also absorb
knowledge in an efficient way so that
you know basically they can live their
whole lives as voracious consumers of
books which i think is a great gift to
give them
um the book that my son taran is reading
right now is called radical honesty
because we've been talking a lot about
telling the truth and the propensity
that he has sometimes has to twist the
truth or to tell a lie
and i told him
taryn you you are hyper creative and he
is he's hyper creative like
everything from the stories he tells to
the fiction that he writes the art that
he produces to the murals on his walls
super hyper creative and i told him a
look that that that creativity can
manifest in two different ways it can
manifest as a negative attribute in your
life and the propensity to be able to
tell stories that protect you and yet
might hurt others or to tell stories
that allow you to get more and others to
have less or to tell lies that hurt
other people and yet that same
creativity can be used for great good it
can be used to inspire people and to
make art and to tell wonderful stories
and to create new things
and
so i think that many of the emotions
that we have right anger can be turned
towards towards righteousness and
justice um fear can be turned towards
like caution or curiosity or like shame
can be turned into
into into gratefulness with no regrets
right there just this identification
that something went wrong and i'm
grateful for that learning experience
because every single learning experience
makes me a better person so what what i
think is that we have this human
propensity based on the fact that you
know god didn't make us puppets he gave
us free will and you know we do some
stupid things because of that but
this idea is that we we all have these
emotions that can be
for good or for bad that can be positive
or negative depending on how they're
manifested and i think that we won't
lose those emotions that will retain our
full spirits and our character and
everything like that
in heaven but that
the propensity the temptation to have
those emotions manifest negatively will
no longer be present
if that makes sense it does man it is
utterly fascinating i've never thought
to ask like the question of what people
imagine what would heaven be like like
just the fact that you think of sort of
the all perfect heaven is like man
that'd be pretty boring um so when i
hear you describe it it sounds
more like sort of this but with some of
the edges
this but
perfect right and and it's like one
understanding your definition of what
makes that perfect is fascinating yeah
and and you know it would be different
than mine think about like well why
isn't it perfect now like why the hell
would god have made a world and made it
perfect and then let us it up right
your answer is that just that just seems
ludicrous well if the world was made
perfect
and human beings especially
uh
who
who who seem to be um
kind of like the more the most complex
of creatures on this planet arguably
um in terms of just like our
consciousness and and our creativity and
you know and and
in the fact that you know if you read
the bible it says like we're the ones
who are kind of made most like the image
of god right and so there was something
special that god did with us for some
reason that that he just he wanted one
creature that he could sit up there and
and be super happy you know watching run
around in this wonderful planet that he
created and all the you know the water
and the green the trees and the forest
and the mountains and all the crazy
kinds of food and fat and honey and milk
and and all these things you know it's
similar to when i'm sitting in my house
and i look out of my window and i can
see my kids and my wife playing in the
backyard with smiles on their faces
enjoying this this you know oasis out in
the forest that i've been able to create
for them like it brings a great deal of
joy to my heart and in a way i can
almost tap into oh this is why god did
that he just wanted to make something
really cool that he could then derive a
great deal of pleasure out of out of
watching being experienced with with joy
and happiness and love and and i get
that it's almost as though you and i
could create like a little
like ant hill and just watch those ants
all day long and just love everything
they're doing and have created that yet
if
he made all that and he just like made
us puppets and he could just like snap
his finger and you do this and you do
that and you had no free will
then
really
you're you're a puppet right you're just
basically liking like like an automaton
like a robot walking around
pre-programmed
to do whatever it is that god
pre-programmed you to do with no feeling
as though you're you're of your own
independent volition enjoying all these
things on your own so there had to be
some amount of free will built into the
equation but by the nature of human
beings being given free will that also
meant that we had the opportunity to be
able to
not do certain things that or really i
would say more appropriately to do
certain things that god said wouldn't be
a good idea in this case if you look at
the creation story like consuming an
element of the planet earth that he said
not to and i i don't know why maybe that
was something that he was going to like
this tree of the knowledge of good and
evil that adam and eve ate and then crap
hit the fan and they sinned and all of a
sudden you know had to start killing
animals for food and you know people
started murdering each other and all
this bad stuff happened uh based on that
initial disobedience
why god would have done that like given
us free will and then said oh but by the
way you know you have total free will
but if you do this one thing like things
gonna go really bad
maybe he did that so
that we could show
how much we loved him by actually giving
us the opportunity to not love him in a
certain way and because he was the
almighty creator that made him happy
right that there was something that
could show there on earth that people
loved him more than they loved
themselves maybe it was something
that human beings were going to have
revealed to them like thousands of years
down the road once they were ready for
it that that was going to be something
they could experience like i don't know
why but what i do know is that we had
some amount of free will and
based on us having free will we had the
opportunity to make a mistake and we
made a mistake and so interesting to me
hearing you talk about this
so einstein had that famous quote i want
to know god's thoughts everything else
is just details
and that always resonated with me it's
part of what draws me to
i don't i don't understand math in the
slightest but i find myself
drawn to physics and astronomy and just
like understanding the universe and like
the very sort of fundamental nature of
what the universe is
and as you were talking i was like
this is like the
the arts versus the sciences approach to
trying to understand god's thoughts
it's really really interesting
and unfortunately i have to rap i'm so
sad i've enjoyed the life out of
this conversation and i just want to put
one period on this even the way you hold
your face is different from the last
time that we met it is utterly
fascinating
not that it's the way you're holding
your face it is way more relaxed and
just um
it's
utterly fascinating and all leaning
towards the good it is really
interesting so whatever you've been
doing focusing on it's amazing dude uh
keep doing your thing thanks thank you
for being so fascinating i
always enjoy our time together dude i
could talk to you forever like like you
just you
you um
you have a way about you when you ask
questions of just like opening up the
portal to where we we could literally
just like riff on one question for hours
and uh
dude i just i appreciate your curiosity
and your intelligence and and the fact
that you've created what you've created
so
thanks for being you tom thank you
brother until next time until next time
alright everybody until next time be
legendary take care peace
oh wait where can people find you i
can't believe we oh we have the
ambulance of course google
is google a bad word yet i don't i don't
know but not yet not on my side of the
world no just just you know you're fine
ben greenfield fitness there.com all
right and be sure to subscribe until
next time be legendary take care peace
[Music]
so
you